# Project 7: Virtual Machine (Arithmetic)

## Implementation Details

We propose implementing the basic VM translator in two stages. This allows
unit-testing your implementation incrementally, using the test programs we
supplied you. In what follows, when we say “your VM translator should implement
some VM command" we mean “your VM translator should translate the given VM
command into a sequence of assembly commands that accomplish the same task".

### Stage I: Handling stack arithmetic commands

The first version of your basic VM translator should implement the nine
arithmetic / logical commands of the VM language as well as the VM
command push constant x.
The latter command is the generic push command for which the first
argument is constant, and the second argument is some non-negative integer
x. This command comes handy at this early stage, since it helps provide
values for testing the implementation of the arithmetic / logical VM
commands. For example, in order to test how your VM translator handles
the VM add command, we can test how it handles the VM code:

```
push constant 3
push constant 5
add
```

The other arithmetic and logical commands are tested similarly:
add, sub, neg, and, or, not, shiftleft, shiftright, eq, gt, lt
This stage can be tested using SimpleAdd, which is relatively simple, and
StackTest, which is slightly more complex.

### Stage II: Handling memory access commands

The next version of your basic VM translator should include a full
implementation of the VM language's push and pop commands, handling the
eight memory segments described in chapter 7. We suggest breaking this
stage into the following sub-stages:

- You have already handled the constant segment;
- Next, handle the segments local, argument, this, and that. This can be
  tested using BasicTest.
- Next, handle the pointer and temp segments, in particular allowing
  modification of the bases of the this and that segments. This can be
  tested using PointerTest.
- Finally, handle the static segment. This can be tested using StaticTest.

### Testing

We supply VM programs designed to unit-test the staged implementation
proposed above. For each program Xxx we supply four files. The Xxx.vm
file contains the program's VM code. The XxxVME.tst script allows running
the program on the supplied VM emulator, to experiment with the program’s
intended operation. After translating the program using your VM
translator, the supplied Xxx.tst script and Xxx.cmp compare file allow
testing the translated assembly code on the supplied CPU emulator.

For each one of the five test programs supplied above, follow these steps:

- To get acquainted with the intended behavior of the supplied test
  program Xxx.vm, run it on the supplied VM emulator using the supplied
  XxxVME.tst script.
- Use your VM translator to translate the supplied Xxx.vm file. The
  result should be a new text file containing Hack assembly code, named
  Xxx.asm.
- Inspect the Xxx.asm program generated by your VM translator. If there
  are visible syntax (or any other) errors, debug and fix your VM translator.
- To check if the generated code performs properly, use the supplied
  Xxx.tst and Xxx.cmp files to run the Xxx.asm program on the supplied CPU
  emulator. If there are any problems, debug and fix your VM translator.

### Implementation Order

The supplied test programs were carefully planned to test the incremental
features introduced by each development stage of your basic VM
translator.

Therefore, it's important to implement your translator in the
proposed order, and to test it using the appropriate test programs at
each stage. Implementing a later stage before an early one may cause the
test programs to fail.

## Submission Template

- VMtranslator: The executable for the project. This allows our graders to run
  your project in a standard manner on UNIX-like operating systems.
- Makefile: A makefile for the project. This allows our graders to prepare your
  project for execution in a standard manner on UNIX-like operating systems.
- Main.py: The project's main .py file.
- Parser.py: Handles the parsing of a single .vm file.
- CodeWriter.py: Translates VM commands into Hack assembly code.

## Tools

Before setting out to develop your VM translator, we recommend getting
acquainted with the virtual machine architecture model and language. As
mentioned above, this can be done by running, and experimenting with, the
supplied .vm test programs using the supplied VM emulator.

### The VM Emulator

This program, located in your nand2tetris/tools directory, is designed to
execute VM programs in a direct and visual way, without having to first
translate them into machine language. For example, you can use the
supplied VM emulator to see - literally speaking - how push and pop
commands effect the stack. And, you can use the simulator to execute any
one of the supplied .vm test programs.

For more information about our built-in tools, see the tutorials in the
lectures and submission page, and additional information provided in
tools/README.md.

## What To Submit

- You should submit a zip file with the following files:
  A run-file named “VMtranslator”, a Makefile called “Makefile”, an AUTHORS file,
  and the source code for your implementation.
- The submission should not contain any folder.
- The AUTHORS file must contain the following:
  - In the first line: login(s) of the author(s), separated by commas and
    nothing else! If you work alone, do not include a comma.
    Logins should be identical to the names of your home folders and are
    case-sensitive.
  - Name(s), email(s) and ID(s) of the project's author(s).
  - Any remarks you have about your submission.
- You can change the template however you want, or even not use it at all.
  But, your project should use the same standard installation and running
  procedures, and standard inputs that the template uses.

## License

This file is part of nand2tetris, as taught in The Hebrew University, and
was written by Aviv Yaish. It is an extension to the specifications given
[here](https://www.nand2tetris.org) (Shimon Schocken and Noam Nisan, 2017),
as allowed by the Creative Common Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0
Unported [License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).
